Dearest Father, You asked me the other day why I said that I was afraid of you. As usual, 
I didn’t know how to answer you, partly because of my fear of you, partly because there are too many particular reasons for that fear for me to be in any way able to put them all together in one talk. 
And if I’m trying to answer you here in writing it’ll thus be very incomplete, because even in writing fear and its consequences hinder me in my dealings with you, 
and because the dimension of the subject far exceeds my memory and my understanding. 
The matter has always seemed very simple to you, at least insofar as you’ve talked to me about it and, without any reserve, 
before many others. It seemed to you to be something along these lines you’ve worked hard all your life, you’ve sacrificed everything for your children, above all for me, and as a result, 
I’ve lived up to the hilt, I had complete freedom to learn what I wanted to, I had no cause to worry about food, and moreover no worries at all. 
You didn’t expect gratitude for that, you know all about the gratitude of children, but you expected at least some kind of agreeable behaviour, 
some sign of mutual understanding, instead of that I’ve always kept away from you, in my room, with books, with crazy friends, with extravagant ideas I’ve never spoken openly with you, 
I didn’t come over to you in the temple, I never visited you in Franzensbad nor did I ever have any other sense of family, I’ve never taken any interest in your business or your other affairs, 
I was a burden for you in the factory and then I left you, I’ve supported Ottla in her obstinacy, and while I never lift a finger for you (I don’t even bring you theatre tickets !), 
I do everything for my friends. If you summed up your opinion of me it turns out that you don’t reproach me for anything really indecent or evil (with the exception perhaps of my recent intention to marry), 
but of coldness, of distancing myself from you and of ingratitude. And you reproach me with that as if it were my fault, as if I could have arranged everything differently by going in a different direction, 
whereas you aren’t the least bit to blame, other than that you were perhaps too good to me. 
I consider your usual version of the situation to be correct only to the extent that I too think that you’re entirely blameless for our alienation. But I’m equally as entirely blameless. 
If I could get you to acknowledge that, then not that a new life would be possible, we’re both much too old for that, but a kind of peace, not a cessation but a softening of your incessant reproaches. 
Strangely enough you have some idea of what I want to say. For example, you recently told me, I’ve always liked you, even if I haven’t outwardly been like other fathers tend to be, just because I can’t pretend like others can. 
Now, Father, on the whole I’ve never doubted your kindness towards me, but I consider that remark to be incorrect. You can’t pretend to be what you aren’t, that’s true, 
but to say for that reason alone that other fathers are pretending is either mere arrogance that can’t be discussed any further, or else is and in my opinion it really is, 
the veiled expression of the fact that something’s really wrong between us and that you’ve helped to cause it, but without being guilty of it. If you really mean that, then we’re in agreement. 
Of course, I’m not saying that I’ve become what I am only because of your influence. That would be a great exaggeration (although I’m even inclined to believe it). 
It’s very possible that even if I’d grown up completely free of your influence I couldn’t have become a person after your own heart. I would probably have become a weak, anxious, hesitant, restless person, neither Robert Kafka nor Karl Hermann, 
but quite different from what I really am, and we could have gotten along splendidly. I would have been happy to have you as a friend, as a boss, as an uncle, as a grandfather, even (albeit more hesitantly) as a fatherinlaw. 
But just as a father you were too strong for me, especially since my brothers died young and my sisters came long after me, so I had to bear the first blow all by myself, and I was much too weak for that.